doc: add guidance for RPC to developer notes (#30142)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/developer-notes.md

  - *Rationale*: JSON strings are Unicode strings, not byte strings, and
    RFC8259 requires JSON to be encoded as UTF-8.

A few guidelines for modifying and reviewing existing RPC interfaces:

> - Implement an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior when modifying the structure of RPC interface JSON.  This includes, but is not limited to, changes such as: data types changes (e.g. from `{"result":{"warnings":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":[]}}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"result":{"warning":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":""}}`).  Include detailed instructions on feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior in release notes.

Reviewer: Perhaps useful to elaborate a bit more on distinguishing between backwards compatible/incompatible behaviour?

```suggestion
- Implement an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior when modifying the structure of RPC interface JSON in a backwards-incompatible manner.  This includes, but is not limited to, changes such as: data types changes (e.g. from `{"result":{"warnings":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":[]}}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"result":{"warning":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":""}}`). Include detailed instructions on feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior in release notes. Adding fields is generally considered backwards compatible.
```

Reviewer: Oh would also add that deprecated behaviour should be documented in the RPC docs, such as e.g. in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0ca1d1bf69ca364393e924cf41becfde1b68126c/src/rpc/net.cpp#L663-L664?

Reviewer 2: Yes, we've also traditionally mentioned these in all-caps in the RPC helps, i.e.

```
RPCResult{RPCResult::Type::STR, "warnings", "(DEPRECATED) network and blockchain warnings, if any...)"} :
```

Author: Thanks. Mentioned that adding a key to an object is considered backward compatible. Also added an example from RPC code with `DEPRECATED`.

> - Implement an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior when modifying the structure of RPC interface JSON.  This includes, but is not limited to, changes such as: data types changes (e.g. from `{"result":{"warnings":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":[]}}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"result":{"warning":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":""}}`).  Include detailed instructions on feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior in release notes.

Author: Thanks. Specified that the release note should refer to RPC help, and led with `is being changed in a backwards-incompatible way`

  - *Rationale*: JSON strings are Unicode strings, not byte strings, and
    RFC8259 requires JSON to be encoded as UTF-8.

> - When choosing data types for RPC JSON, prefer data types that are flexible to expansion without change of data type. For example, `{"result":{"warnings":[]}}` rather than `{"result":{"warnings":""}}`, which allows for multiple warnings to be included as array elements.

Reviewer 3: nit: this sentence might be better structured starting with a verb:

```
Prefer to choose RPC JSON data types that are flexible to expansion without change of data type.
```

> - When choosing data types for RPC JSON, prefer data types that are flexible to expansion without change of data type. For example, `{"result":{"warnings":[]}}` rather than `{"result":{"warnings":""}}`, which allows for multiple warnings to be included as array elements.

Author: Thanks for taking a look.  
Good point.  Removed this statement as it is quite similar to `Try to make the RPC response a JSON object` and could be confusing.

  - *Rationale*: Planning for expansion can reduce RPC interface updates, reducing incompatibility risk to downstream applications.

>  

Author: Thanks.  Fixed

A few guidelines for modifying and reviewing existing RPC interfaces:

> - When modifying RPC interface JSON structure, implement associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior, including (but not limited to) the following: data types changes (e.g. from `{"result":{"warnings":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":[]}}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, key name changes (e.g. `{"result":{"warning":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":""}}`).  Include detailed instructions on feature deprecation and re-enabling in release notes.

Reviewer 3: nit: this sentence might be better structured starting with a verb:

```
Implement associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior when modifying RPC interface JSON structure, including (but not limited to) the following:
```

Author: Thanks.  Agreed.  Updated.

  - *Rationale*: JSON strings are Unicode strings, not byte strings, and
    RFC8259 requires JSON to be encoded as UTF-8.

> A few guidelines for modifying and reviewing existing RPC interfaces:

Reviewer 4: nit: Below doesn't talk about reviewing afaict

``` suggestion
A few guidelines for modifying existing RPC interfaces:
```

Author: Updated. Thanks.

> - If an RPC is being changed in a backward-incompatible way, add an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior during the deprecation period. Backward-incompatible changes include: data type changes (e.g. from `{"warnings":""}` to `{"warnings":[]}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"warning":""}` to `{"warnings":""}`). Adding a key to an object is generally considered backward compatible. A release note should be included that refers to RPC help for details of feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior. [Example RPC help](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/94f0adcc31d2d263a03e46192922e3a7672e39d9/src/rpc/blockchain.cpp#L1316-L1323).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It's preferable to avoid changing an RPC in a backward-incompatible manner, but in that case, add an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior during the deprecation period. Backward-incompatible changes include: data type changes (e.g. from `{"warnings":""}` to `{"warnings":[]}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"warning":""}` to `{"warnings":""}`). Adding a key to an object is generally considered backward-compatible. Include a release note that refers the user to the RPC help for details of feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior. [Example RPC help](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/94f0adcc/src/rpc/blockchain.cpp#L1316-L1323).
```

(I don't think the link is the best example, but in any case the URL can be shorter for people who read these notes in their text editor instead of online.)

Author: Updated. Thanks.

Reviewer 5: Related to https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30142#discussion_r1926634436 - it's more uniform now

  - *Rationale*: JSON strings are Unicode strings, not byte strings, and
    RFC8259 requires JSON to be encoded as UTF-8.

A few guidelines for modifying and reviewing existing RPC interfaces:

> - If an RPC is being changed in a backward-incompatible way, add an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior during the deprecation period. Backward-incompatible changes include: data types changes (e.g. from `{"warnings":""}` to `{"warnings":[]}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"warning":""}` to `{"warnings":""}`). Adding a key to an object is generally considered backwards compatible. A release note should be included that refers to RPC help for details of feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior. Example RPC help:

Reviewer 5: Long line, might want to break it up to simplify review suggestions:
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noun_adjunct#Singular_vs_plural - singular sounds better to me: `data types changes` -> `data type changes`
* Unify https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backward_compatibility - for consistency: `backward compatible`
```suggestion
- If an RPC is being changed in a backward-incompatible way, add an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior during the deprecation period. Backward-incompatible changes include: data type changes (e.g. from `{"warnings":""}` to `{"warnings":[]}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"warning":""}` to `{"warnings":""}`). Adding a key to an object is generally considered backward compatible. A release note should be included that refers to RPC help for details of feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior. Example RPC help:
```

Author: Updated to `data type` and `backward`

>     ```c++

Reviewer 5: Would it make sense to [refer to the code](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/rpc/blockchain.cpp#L1316-L1323) instead, to avoid duplication and maintenance burden?

Author: Thanks. Replaced with a permalink for it

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/94f0adcc31d2d263a03e46192922e3a7672e39d9/src/rpc/blockchain.cpp#L1316-L1323

> - If an RPC is being changed in a backward-incompatible way, add an associated `-deprecatedrpc=` option to retain previous RPC behavior during the deprecation period. Backward-incompatible changes include: data types changes (e.g. from `{"result":{"warnings":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":[]}}`, changing a value from a string to a number, etc.), logical meaning changes of a value, or key name changes (e.g. `{"result":{"warning":""}}` to `{"result":{"warnings":""}}`). Adding a key to an object is generally considered backwards compatible. A release note should be included that refers to RPC help for details of feature deprecation and re-enabling previous behavior. Example RPC help:

Author: Good point. Implemented.

        (IsDeprecatedRPCEnabled("warnings") ?
            RPCResult{RPCResult::Type::STR, "warnings", "any network and blockchain warnings (DEPRECATED)"} :
            RPCResult{RPCResult::Type::ARR, "warnings", "any network and blockchain warnings (run with `-deprecatedrpc=warnings` to return the latest warning as a single string)",
            {
                {RPCResult::Type::STR, "", "warning"},
            }
            }
        ),
    ```

>   - *Rationale*: Changes in RPC JSON structure can break downstream application compatibility. Implementation of `deprecatedrpc` provides a grace-period for downstream applications to migrate. Release notes provide notification to downstream users.

Reviewer 5: * https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grace_period
```suggestion
  - *Rationale*: Changes in RPC JSON structure can break downstream application compatibility. Implementation of `deprecatedrpc` provides a grace period for downstream applications to migrate. Release notes provide notification to downstream users.
```

Author: Implemented
